Add decision for resetting the JS API (#31)
alphagov/govuk-design-system-architecture: decision-records/008-reset-the-javascript-api.md

# Reset the JavaScript API for our components

## Decision

We will mark all class and instance properties other than the constructor and the init method as deprecated as part of a v4.x release.

> In v5.0 we will then add JSDoc annotations to mark the deprecated properties as private.

Reviewer: Added a comment below about "internal" things that we'd mark with [JSDoc `@protected`](https://jsdoc.app/tags-protected.html)

```mjs
class Accordion {
  #secret

  /** @protected */
  $module

  constructor ($module, secret) {
    this.$module = $module
    this.#secret = secret
  }
}

class SuperAccordion extends Accordion {
  constructor ($module) {
    super($module)
    
    // ✅ Protected things
    console.log(this.$module)
    
    // ❌ Private things
    console.log(this.#secret)
  }
}
```

Author: Similar to above, I don't think there's anything in this decision that'd prevent us from being able to adopt `@protected` in the future, where it makes sense to do so.

In v4.x, for each component class, we will mark all class and instance properties other than the constructor and the `init` method as deprecated.

> In v5.0 we will then add JSDoc annotations to mark the deprecated properties as private. We will also annotate any 'internal' classes, like the `I18n` class, as internal.

Reviewer: Probably going too far, but they're not always classes that are "internal only"

We haven't actually configured access for `Accordion.defaults` etc static properties (yet?)

````suggestion
In v5.0 we will then add JSDoc annotations to mark the deprecated properties as private.

Some component properties will remain publicly accessible but we'll annotate them for internal use only, such as:

```mjs
Accordion.defaults
new Accordion().config
new Accordion().i18n
```
````

Author: `Accordion.config` and `Accordion.i18n` are both currently private – why would we want to make them public?

Reviewer: As in _literally_ public to a browser, we can't stop them being public

Just giving examples of three things that might be `@public`, `@protected` and `@internal`

From https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-design-system-architecture/pull/31/files#r1276470115 just need to widen "**'internal' classes**" to include all the other things (like helpers and utilities)

```suggestion
In v5.0 we will then add JSDoc annotations to mark the deprecated properties as private. We will also annotate any internal classes, helpers and utilities—like the `I18n` class—with JSDoc `@internal`.
```

- clearly defined and documented
- comprehensively tested

**Date:** 2023-07-20

> **Status:** Accepted

Reviewer 2: **issue** These need lifting to the top of the document (after the title) for consistency with the other decision records.

Many of the methods exposed on the classes or objects can only be called internally as they need to be passed internal state, or are designed to be used internally by the component as event handlers.

We also have little or no test coverage for calling these methods externally.

This means that:

- it's unclear for users whether they are allowed to call or interact with each property
- it's difficult for us to judge what constitutes a breaking change

'Resetting' the public API by marking everything else as private gives us the freedom to refactor the internals of the component before then introducing a properly designed, tested and documented public API.

## Risks and constraints

Users who are relying on being able to access now private class or instance properties from from their own code will need to either:

- wait until we introduce an equivalent way to achieve the same thing using the public API before they can upgrade beyond v5
- continue to use the private properties 'at risk', and manually test or verify changes between releases

> ## Alternatives considered

Reviewer: Do we need to explore things like this?

1. Using [actually-private class fields](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes/Private_class_fields) with a Babel transform
2. Using [JSDoc `@protected`](https://jsdoc.app/tags-protected.html) for properties an extended class could access, but still externally private

Author: I don't think so, only because they're not mutually exclusive in the long run – we're choosing to use `@private` annotations now, but we could still choose to make things actually-private or add `@protected` to the mix in the future without needing to revisit this decision.

Reviewer: Yeah I do agree

But is it worth documenting that we'll knowingly mark public class fields as `@private`?

E.g. JSDoc compiler [warning about `new Component().i18n`](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-frontend/blob/d9f593322e1722a6d6b80443f9829ad4e38bfe4c/packages/govuk-frontend-review/typedoc.config.js#L19)

Author: I'm not sure of the value of marking individual properties as internal – public or protected seem appropriate there.

Internal is useful for the I18n class because it has public properties (because they need to be called from outside of the class) but we want to differentiate it from classes designed to be called outside of the package.

Author: Do `private` or `public` actually make sense on functions outside of the context of a class? If so, what do those annotations mean?

The way I'm thinking about it in my head:

- `public` and `private` relate to access in the context of the encapsulation of a class (whether the method should be called from outside of the class)
- `internal` relates to access in the context of the package (so we can call the public bits of the internal `I18n` class from elsewhere in GOV.UK Frontend, but we don't want users to)

Reviewer: Yeah spot on

You've only said "**'internal' classes**" but it should be "**'internal' classes, helpers and utilities**" etc?
